docs: adds auth concept to glee docs (#564)
asyncapi/glee: docs/pages/auth-concept/authentication.md

---
title: 'Authentication functions'
weight: 3
---

# Getting started with Authentication functions

Authentication in Glee can be done using authentication functions. Authentication functions are files that export either one or both of the `clientAuth` and `serverAuth` Node.js functions:

```js
/* websocket.js */

export async function serverAuth({ authProps, done }) {
  //server auth logic
}

export async function clientAuth({ parsedAsyncAPI, serverName }) {
  //client auth logic
}
```

Glee looks for authentication files in the `auth` directory by default but it can be configured using [glee config file](../config-file.md).
The name of the authentication file should be the name of the targeted server that the authentication logic should work for.

## Supported Authentication Values in asyncapi.yaml file

AsyncAPI currently supports a variety of authentication formats as specified in the [documentation](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v2.6.0#securitySchemeObject), however Glee supports the following authentication schemas.

- userPassword

> - Bearer token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- http
```
let's be consistent with the security docs

- HttpPApiKey
- ApiKey

A sample `asyncapi.yaml` for a server with security requirements and a `userPassword` security schemes is shown below:

```yaml
##server asyncAPI schema

> asyncapi: 2.6.0

Reviewer: can you use a v3 example? since glee only supports v3 now.

info:
  title: AsyncAPI IMDB server
  version: 1.0.0
  description: This app is a dummy server that would stream the trending/upcoming anime.
servers:
  trendingAnimeServer:
    url: 'http://localhost:8081'
    protocol: http
    security:
      - userPass: []

  ...

components:
  securitySchemes:
    userPass:
      type: userPassword

```

A sample `asyncapi.yaml` for a client that implements some of the requirements of the server above:

```yaml
##client asyncAPI schema
servers:
  trendingAnime:
    url: http://localhost:8081
    protocol: http
    security:

>       - userPass: []

Reviewer: this format has been changed in v3.

  testwebhook:
    url: ws://localhost:9000
    protocol: ws
x-remoteServers:
  - trendingAnime

  ...

components:
  securitySchemes:
    userPass:
      type: userPassword

```

> **The Client asyncapi.yaml file does not need to implement all the security requirements in the server, it only needs to implement the ones that it uses.**

Reviewer: an example would be great here.

Author: Are you talking abt `securitySchemas` instances that client uses `userPass` here only excluding other requirements like token or httpApikey etc.?

Reviewer: TBH, I don't know what this line means. 😆 that's why I was asking for an example.
cc: @Souvikns @oviecodes

Author: > Client asyncapi.yaml file only needs to contain the security requirements

Sorry @oviecodes, do you mean client uses `userPass` here only excluding others?

Reviewer: @afzal442 since almost always there is only one way for a client to authenticate against a server, I suggest we remove this line. It causes confusion.

Author: instead expanded it like now

> Glee can act as both a server and a client at the same time. Hence the need for `serverAuth` and `clientAuth`. Glee acts as a client when the `x-remoteServers` property is present in the `asyncapi.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glee can act as both a server and a client. Hence the need for `serverAuth` and `clientAuth`. Glee acts as a client when the server name is included in the `x-remoteServers` property in the `asyncapi.yaml` file.
```
I think it makes sense to include an example of `x-remoteServers` here.

> When Glee acts as a client, it can connect to a Glee server, and when Glee acts as a server it accepts connection from other Glee clients. Hence a Glee application can both accept connections from clients while also sending requests to other Glee applications (servers) ath the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Glee acts as a client, it can connect to a Glee server, and when Glee acts as a server it accepts connections from other Glee clients. Hence a Glee application can both accept connections from clients while also sending requests to other Glee applications (servers) at the same time.
```

> When a security requirement is specified in the `asyncapi.yaml` file and Glee acts as a server, the `serverAuth` function should be implemented, if Glee acts as a client then the `clientAuth` function should be implemented. If Glee is being used as both client and server, then it should have both the `clientAuth` and `serverAuth` functions.

Reviewer: > If Glee is being used as both client and server, then it should have both the `clientAuth` and `serverAuth`

@oviecodes not sure how this works. 🤔 
glee will be a client of itself? how?

Author: @oviecodes wdyt?

## Server Authentication in Glee

The `serverAuth` function takes an argument that can be destructured as follows

| Attribute  | Description                                                     |
| ---------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| done       | The done function that tells the server to proceed.             |
| authProps  | The authentication parameters recieved from the client.         |
| serverName | The name of the server/broker from which the event was emitted. |
| doc        | The parsedAsyncAPI schema                                       |

### done()

The `done` parameter in the `serverAuth` function allows the broker/server to know what to do next depending on the boolean value you pass to it.

```js
/* websocket.js */

export async function serverAuth({ authProps, done }) {
  // done(true)
  //done(false, 401, "Unauthorized")

>   // done(false)

Reviewer: done can accept three parameters. please document this.

Author: sorry @KhudaDad414 Are you saying abt this `done(false, 401, "Unauthorized")`?
```
to know what to do next depending on the boolean value you pass to it.
```
For this, I think I can modify the abv line to
```
to know what to do next depending on the boolean value you pass to it along with status code and access type.
```

Reviewer: I mean the `done()` function parameters should be explained as well. something like:

#### Parameters
1. **Authentication Result (`Boolean`)**: `true` for success, `false` for failure.
2. **HTTP Status Code (`Integer`)**: Code for authentication failure (e.g., 401 for Unauthorized).
3. **Status Message (`String`)**: Description of the authentication result (e.g., "Unauthorized").

> export async function serverAuth({ authProps, done }) {
>   // done(true)
>   //done(false, 401, "Unauthorized")
>   // done(false)
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export async function serverAuth({ authProps, done }) {
  if (isValidUser(authProps)) {
    done(true);
  } else {
    done(false, 401, "Unauthorized");
  }
}
```

| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `getOauthToken()`      | returns the oauth authentication parameter                                                       |
| `getHttpAPIKeys(name)` | returns the HttpAPIKeys parameter with the specified name from either headers or query parameter |
| `getToken()`           | returns the http bearer token parameter                                                          |
| `getUserPass()`        | returns username and password parameters                                                         |

## Client Authentication in Glee

The `clientAuth` function also takes an argument, and it's argument can be destructured as follows

| Attribute      | Description                                                                           |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| parsedAsyncAPI | The parsedAsyncAPI schema.                                                            |

> | serverName     | The name of the server/broker from with the authentication parameters are being sent. |

Reviewer: @Souvikns @oviecodes does the auth function really need arguments? what would be the use case of parsedAsyncAPI and the user already has the serverName since they created a file with the name of the server right?
